One of the things I can think of is that we were
trying to get a street maintenance program going,
a renovation program, and I submitted it to Robert
and never never could get it could get it going that
and the the landscape rejuvenation program was
another one that I think probably was landscape
rejuvenation program I was trying I was trying to
get some this was to Cargill I remember now because
they'd come out with saying that you could use the
available fund monies for this and that and all and
so I'd been thinking about it and I sat down and
wrote up a, I don't know, probably a four or five
page squib on why I cited some specific examples of
buildings and this kind of thing that we had to had
to do as well as the irrigation stuff. We were
getting to the point where a lot of our irrigation
systems needed renovation and we needed to go to
another control system. And one thing I might
mention too that I'm kind of proud of, And as part of
all this development, the irrigation systems got
to mounting up, and we got to the point that we had
more irrigation systems going than we could turn
off when it rained. And Mike and I had talked about
some way to handle it, and he'd looked into see if
there were anything available, and there wasn't
anything available readily on the market. And
then one day, after one of our summers like this,
and hired vessels coming into work, And he was
coming around the North Durham area and the
sprinklers were going and it was raining. And I got
a call. And he said, cut the damn sprinklers off.
And I said, we are, Mr. Vestal. It takes about four
man days to cut just to switch the things off. He
said, we need to fix that. And I said, we're working
on it. So Goldwater and I got busy and we got to
talking about it. And we were talking to Motorola
at the time about a new radio system, two-way. And
we got to talking to him a little bit more and and.
And that's where Goldwater came in. I mean he he's
got a real inquisitive mind. And the upshot was
that Motorola had developed a switch. That they
had installed on a number of residential hot water
heaters. In Central Arkansas, some power grid or
power company over there. And they did that, and
they kept, they would switch hot water heaters
randomly on and off, you know. And by doing that,
they saved building a power plant. Okay. So we got
to talking about, well, could we take something
like that, and incorporated in our existing
controllers and so we got to working with motorola
folks and then got the toro folks came into it
because they had what they call their golf course
control system which was a bank of i think six big
controllers Anyway, the upshot was we were able to
take and modify our existing controllers and we
designed a console and board that had
36 switches. Yeah. And I had 30 switches because we
got a radio system that was a non-voice control
system and that would generate 30 coded tones. And
so the upshot was we would put a tone read and some
relays in our existing, we did all this in-house in
our existing controllers, and then a radio switch
up on that thing. And we could control, we got to the
point where we could, we had six master clocks, and
we could, by a series of switches, we could control
switch it to one clock or another, switch it off or
whatever, and we got to the point where we could
turn everything on remotely by radio, and if,
let's say, and we put what we called a black box in
the physical plant radio room, so that if there was
a fire or something of that nature, they could flip
a switch and in 30 seconds, all the extraneous
water was off. And we had to use that when Penn State
came to play here because lightning knocked out
every well in the well field. And all the water we
had was in the tower. But, and that ultimately
became, Motorola and Total kept doing that, and
they've now got one that has feedback. I mean, it's
got all kinds of bells and whistles. But that's
where all that got started. And ours was getting
kind of old. We were trying to upgrade upgrade that
to you know much much better level but uh and we had
it tied into a rain stat that we could set it for a
quarter half an inch and it would shut everything
down automatically and that solved howard's
problem in comparison to the campus proper now i'm
not talking about the ag experiment fields about
what percentage of the water usage as far as you
know during those years was used in grounds
maintenance? How much water was used in flower
beds and grass and trees? I think it was...
Compared to the rest of the campus usage? Probably
about 40 percent, because I think, no about 30
percent, because I think we figured one time on on
all of our tap valves and what it would run, and we
were using about a million gallons to a million and
a half gallons every time we watered.
How could we have done campus planning better from
the landscape, from the grounds maintenance?
It would have been, I think, better if there had
been some more long-range stuff done so that you
had, because so many of the master plans. Now, the
West Campus came about pretty good because
Strickland-Rollins did a master plan. That was
followed reasonably well. But most of the other
master plans kind of got put up on the shelf. And no
one was ever
pushing to get it implemented, you know. Having
been here, having gotten here 41 years ago, I think
this campus looks unplanned. It does. The
architecture is inconsistent. And Paul Stevens
and I used to have some real hard arguments. I kept
saying, we need some continuity in buildings. He
said, well, the architecture's dying. I said,
well, who the hell does he work for? You know. And it
was about that time that at least they settled on a
consistent brick. That was a step. But no, I think
there needed to be some planning standards. And
each architect got that, just like they got the Red
Book. And these are your boundaries. And Paul
says, no, you can't give them boundaries. And I
said, well, you can't let them build something
that's a monument to their own being. And that's
essentially what's happened with a lot of the
buildings, I think. Typist, this also does need to
be put in there. When I got to UT El Paso 20 years ago
right now, the architecture out there is copied
after the little nation of Bhutan up in the
Himalayas near Nepal. Oh. building on the campus
is that style. And one of my great accomplishments
was a new library building, $28 million. And the
guidelines we gave to the architectural firm, the
first three principles were it must be Bhutanese,
it must be Bhutanese, it must be Bhutanese. Then
next is we want as much building per dollar as we can
get. And the next point is it must be expandable in
each of the four directions horizontally and it
must be expandable vertically. Expandable
vertically. Yeah. Don't have to go down. You've
got to go, because we don't know how libraries are
going. And we got a building including
furnishings for $80 a square foot. Wow. And he
finished six months ahead of schedule. Wow. And it
works superbly. Yeah. So it could be done. Let's
see. Among the realities that A&M, correct me if
I'm wrong, among the realities that A&M must cope
with in terms of grounds maintenance and so forth
is we do have one of the most difficult locations in
terms of oil and climate. Yes, without question. I
know Bob Rucki said that's the reason they put A&M
here. But the soil is a problem and the water is an
even bigger problem. and the soil can be with
organic matter and this kind of thing you can you
can kind of work around that a little bit but the
water problem is you just got to wait on mother
nature to leach it out as far as you know if we went
deeper for our water wells could we get better
water that i don't know it would probably be hotter
i guess
but i i really
know I just don't know because I haven't been on in
on many of those many of those discussions. All
right let's see now we're going to try to summarize
things of which you're great most proud most
greatest successes.
Oh I think that during all the real building and and
all like this is that we kept the campus looking
looking very good and that we were able to i think
change some ideas particularly with the staff
about you know and and create some um intensity
about hey this is looking good you know and it it
it's something that grows it's it's like i
mentioned the garden area system you've got one
real good garden over here another one over here
that's maybe not quite as good and he's always
looking over there seeing what the other guy's
doing maybe i need to do that and that kind of thing
and it's it's something that that that builds a
pride because when i got here our folks didn't have
any pride They just, because they were afraid if
they did something, they'd get torn up. Examples
you can remember where somebody bothered to take
the time to show some appreciation for the work
y'all had done? Oh, yeah. I've got some nice notes
from people like O.D. Butler, some
Howard Vestal's one, and there may be some from
some of the presidents. Perry Atkinson, you know,
a number of folks like that. Any off-campus
visitors, notes or comments you remember? Yeah, I
can't think of who. Governors?
No, don't think we had any comments from any of the
governors. All right, now that causes me to think,
did y'all have any involvement in the Bush Library
dream? a little bit I didn't have any involvement
in uh... in the planning because that was in the Joe
Sugg era when I didn't get any looks at the reviews
or anything like that but uh... the in the last
three months of that I lived out there because I was
the liaison between uh... the contractor
facilities planning and the university as far as
particularly outside and some of the inside, and I
was trying to help the Bush School. They were
having problems with the building. That's 96, 97?
This, well, it was, no, it was 90, yeah, 97, 97,
because it was... probably from july until the
building the building was dedicated and uh that's
that's basically all i did is finally i went i went
to joe ester and i said look we've got to get this
outside you need to give us a work order and tell the
contractor to scoot and he did and we got it ready
you know for the dedication uh special moments
that you remember specific moments of joy, pride?
I don't know when I look out and look at all the trees
that we planted and
because probably every tree under 15 or 16 inches
in diameter
been planted since 1973. And being able to, you
know, kind of delineate the campus and the streets
and this kind of thing. I don't know, we always
tried to make the landscape as the, try and think of
the term, kind of the glue that held everything
together, basically. as well as, you know, create
a positive impression. And in a kind of a
sentimental link there, I heard Bob Rucker told me
that he helped water the first trees out toward the
new East Gate when he was an undergraduate. Yeah.
Low moments, sad moments? Oh, I guess when we were
suffering some budget cuts and then when the
merger occurred. That was probably the worst. And
I guess one of the problems is I'd never had
anything like that. I mean, that was totally new
ground, you know, because until,
probably until, I believe after Robert took over a
little bit, but for 16 or 17 years, I had probably
the best ground jobs in the country without any
question. And I would have, we had people from Tech
and Oklahoma and several other schools that would
come to kind of see how we did it, you know. And they
have, as an example, Tech and OU have now broken
their grounds out. And Randy Lacewell at OU
reports directly to the president. He reports
directly to David Boren. He called me up and he
said, he wants me to report directly to him. What am
I gonna do? I said, Randy, you can't beat that. I
said, jump on it and run. He said, well, I just hope I
can outlast the physical plant man.
Of all those years, to whom would you most want to
express appreciation if all of them were still
alive and could be brought here? Probably would be
number one, Bob Rucker, and number two, Tom
Cherry. You know, the rest of them were great, no
question about it. But those two... Put it into
words, why? Well, without those two, I wouldn't
have been here. Just that simple. And without Bob
Rucker, I wouldn't have been in this field. I don't
know what I'd be doing now. Did he help attract you
to major in? No.
They had a program. You know, I was a dumb kid from a
small town. And so everybody else was majoring in
business, so I thought, hey, I will too, you know.
And so we had to take some science. And I'd grown up
in a hatchery and feed store, and I had a small
nursery. and had done a lot of stuff on the side out
of the little nursery area.
So I started to register for
classes, and you could take horticulture as a
science. Hey, I know a little bit about that, I'll
do that. And then I found out that economics and I
didn't agree and so after the first semester I
switched to horticulture and then Bob came and we I
had a class under him that I had landscape design
and then I guess the last couple of years he was
there I worked myself and another friend of mine,
we worked for him for registration and that was
neat because we got to pre-register, we got our
classes like we wanted it, you know, as well as
making a little money too and all.
That's kind of how I got over there, because my
mother was always a big garden clubber, and we'd
had this little nursery, and I'd done a lot of yard
work and a lot of stuff like that. And I guess if it
hadn't been for that, I'd still been trying to
major in business. I don't know.
Let's make believe that you were hired as the
consultant to A&M today. Mm-hmm. If you were a
consultant on the grounds maintenance
landscaping effort, what advice would you give
them? Well, the first thing, they're going to have
to spend some money because you cannot keep adding
acres and acres and acres and expect it to look
class A. Second thing they need to do is they need to
develop some zones of maintenance. At one point in
time we had four, class A, B, C, and D. D being like
roadways and infrequence and all like that. Class
A being MSC, rudder tower, president's home,
library, administration building, the real
heart and core of the campus, that kind of thing.
and that they need to do a little better job in their
training. One of the problems that I think they've
experienced is that, and I probably shouldn't rag
on Joe Sugg, but his idea of a grounds maintenance
was an old boy and a lawn mower to pick up. and what
one of the things that happened with our
irrigation as an example he basically did away for
a while with the control system and every gardener
was operating their own system and water was
coming on anywhere anytime and it was all getting
screwed up and everything until finally they were
able to get a hold of it when i was in the director
well mike and i got together and we got it going back
where we were using the automated system and only a
few people did the programming because you just
can't you can't have 125 or 30 controllers and you
know I mean it's just you might have every
controller in one corner of the campus go and then
you don't have any water for the rest you know it
just because you can't distribute your water
you're equalizing the distribution of your water
but uh now I think the money's that and people need
to be educated that to do the job like people would
like it to be done, it's a costly endeavor, and it
takes some trained people. You can't do it with
laboring folks. I mean, you need some of those, but
you've got to have some other folks that have the
knowledge and expertise to do the scheduling and
help the people and train them and this kind of
thing. Organizationally, it should report? It
should report to the vice president. Vice
president. Yeah. And geographically, for what
area should it be responsible?
Basically everything outside the buildings? No,
no. Oh, any of the public here right now, I think
they've got the responsibility of just about
everything from Texas Avenue to 2818. And that's
all come about with Bush Library because see there
was a lot of area between the library and the
research park that of necessity had to be. But they
have that, they have the research park now too.
Yeah. Oh yeah, we've had the research park since
from the very beginning. At Easterwood Airport
too. Uh-huh. And from the front of the terminal
building and out. Veterinary Medicine. I'm not
sure how those are handled now, but I know at one
point in time we did. Another thing I'm proud of too
is, I talked to Jerry about this, but after the
library came in and we see it was coming about, it
appeared to me that we needed to protect some of the
area so I went up to Jerry and talked to him and asked
him if he minded me working on some of this and I
talked to probably a dozen people on campus from
dean of agriculture down to forest science,
horticulture, rain science, intramurals, rec
sports and the upshot was And I gave it to Jerry, and
he took it to the board. We got the area along the
creek from horticulture down through the library
set back, because I could just see some engineers
saying, we can build across that. And my premise
was that it was time to hold something back for
green area instead of taking it away. Would that be
an appropriate area for a kind of a natural? Yes, an
arboretum and all like this. I mean, that would be
superb. Oh, yeah, yeah, and that's what, and I
think they're beginning, I talked to Sam Cotner
the other day, and I think they're beginning to
work on that, and I want to try to be involved in it,
because that's something that's really near and
dear to me, because I think it'd be really great to
have something that you could take some kids out
from a lecture and look at the real thing, or a
visitor coming to campus would like to look at a
specific plant or something like this and see what
it really looks like in full living, breathing
color, you know. But we're one of the few land grant
universities that does not have anything of that
nature. And it's going to cost some money. But a lot
of it could be done from industry. where they would
give and then give some maintenance subsidy and
this kind of thing, I think. But that took a lot of
work, because I did the tree inventory for the
library. Joe Sugg came in to staff me one day, and he
said, he turned to the assistant director that
Grounds reported to, and he said, I want you to send
a gardener out there and identify all the trees.
And I said, I don't mean to interrupt, but you need
somebody more than a gardener. And he said, well,
you're so damn smart, you go do it. I said, okay. It
got me out of the office. Of course, it was in
August, about like it was now. But there's some
magnificent trees and terrain down in there. It
could be, there are just a lot of things. Without a
great deal of work, you know, there's water oaks
down there that big, monstrous trees. Is there
some kind of natural spring that feeds that little
gullet? Oh, there's not any water that runs all the
time? Well, most of it's drainage water from
campus because it comes all the way down from, in
fact, that drainage way originates over
east of, across the university and east of the
Entomology Field Lab. That's where it
originates.
Really? And I don't know whether you remember, but
before they built the med school, there was a huge
gully that went down through there. And all that's
underground. In fact, the business or the med
school library and the business school, they're
setting a straddle of those big box corporates, I
think. Somebody the other day from off campus
tried to tell me that
Wolfpin Creek drains there. No. Now, Wolfpin
Creek picks up about the library power plant and on
down. Okay, I've got two questions. Somebody
walks up to you and gives you a million dollars, a
million-dollar check with one restriction. You
must pass it on to Texas A&M, and you decide the
purpose of the gift. What would you have to do with
it? It's pretty easy. A portion of it would go to the
Greenway to get it started. And I think probably
some of it would go to help the grounds. And then I
think there needs to be some scholarships endowed
for ornamental horticulture. And on what basis
would the students in that major be selected?
Oh, there would have to be some need involved, but
there'd also have to be some desire involved. You
know, it's needs one thing and desires another
thing. If you can get the need and the desire
together, the better. Because you would like if
someone goes to school, you know, and gets a degree
that they're going to use it. Because I know I have
classmates that went into insurance and a lot of
different things. They didn't use their degree,
and I think that's a waste. All right, now I've just
got one question left. Have we not covered
something that you thought of in advance that we
should have?
I can't think of anything. I really can't. Last
question is, what feelings do you have in your
heart for Texas A&M today? Well, I'm probably more
of an Aggie than I am a Red Raider. I've
never seen a place where the former students
supported like they do. And I thought I'd seen that
at Oklahoma. Of course, that was more for
football, I guess. But Aggies support it.
There's just no argument about it.